 
 

	
	
	Lecture Notes, Class-6
	
		
	
Review from previous class
	
	Introduce material stiffness and systems of springs. 
	Methods for measuring vibrating systems.
		
	
Objectives for today's class
	
	Harmonic excitations of undamped systems
	Harmonic resonance
		
	
Lecture
	
	
Harmonic excitations of undamped systems

	Consider the system
	
				
	For simplicity, let us consider a harmonic excitation for  such that:
		
	note that here,  has no subscript and is the frequency in rad/sec of the driving force.  represents the magnitude of the applied force. This is often called the input frequency, driving frequency, or forcing frequency. Summing the forces in the above figure in the  direction yields:
		
	For convinces we can convert this to the standard form:	
		
	where:
		
	Again, this is a linear, nonhomogeneous, O.D.E. that we need to solve. It is nonhomogeneous because there are no terms related to  on the right hand side of the equation. One way to solve such an equation to recall that the solution for a nonhomogeneous equation is the sum of the homogeneous and particular solutions. 
		
	First, knowing that the solution is the sum of two parts, vibration caused by the forcing function and the oscillations caused by the system of springs and masses, we set the equation for the homogeneous solution to be:
		
	Next, we will denote the particular solution as .  can determined by observing the systems and assuming that it is in form of the forcing function, therefore:
		
	becomes:
		
	where,  is the particular solution and  is the amplitude of the forced response. Our total solution now becomes:
		
	This approach, of assuming that , in order to determine the particular solution is called the method of undetermined coefficients. To calculate , first we take the equations for  and :
		
		
	and substituting these into the equation of motion in standard from yields:
		
	As long as 	, solving for X yields:
		
	Therefore, as long as , the particular solution can take the form
		
	This then expands to the total form
		
	expanding this to the general form for the homogeneous solution obtains the equation
		
	As before, we need to determine the values for the coefficients  and  by enforcing the initial conditions  and . Setting the time to zero () and solving the the initial displacement leads to:
		
	or:
		
	again, solving the equation in terms of velocity:
		
	and solving for the initial velocity at :
		
	or:
		
	Therefor, combining the equations we get:
		
	As before, we can relate  and  to each other through the basic trigonometric identities. This yields, 
		
		
		
		
	The forced and unforced plots can relate to each other as (Note that the forcing function uses the axis on the right):
	
				
	for a system with  = 10 N/m,  = 2.5 kg,  = 4 rad/sec,  = 0.1 kN,  = 1 mm, and  = 0 mm. 
	
	
	
Harmonic resonance	
	
	Recall that our solution from before assumed that , however, if  then the system will develop the phenomenon of resonance. Mathematically, this means the amplitude of the vibrations becomes unbounded. The prior choice of  for the particular solution fails as it is also a solution for a homogeneous equation. Therefore, the particular solution can be written as 
		
	Substituting this into the standard form equation (from Boyce and DiPrima (1997)) and solving for X yields:
		
	thus, the total solution can now be written as:
		
	Note that , therefore, the frequencies are all in terms of the driving frequency . Again, evaluating the solution at  for the initial conditions  and  yields:
		
	The following plot shows the forced response of a spring-mass system driven harmonically at its natural frequency.
	
				

	
Example 1
	
	Compute solutions for the homogeneous and partial solution separately, than compute the total response of a spring-mass system with the following values:  = 1000 N/m,  = 10 kg, subject to a harmonic force of magnitude  = 100 N and frequency of 8.162 rad/s, and initial conditions given by  = 0 m and  = 0 m/s. Plot the response.
	
	
				
	First, make sure that the system is not in resonance. Calculating that  shows us that . Next knowing that  we can find the homogeneous and partial solutions as:
		
		
	also:	
		
	where:	
		
		
		
	This leads to the following results. 
	
				
	
	
Example 2
	Considering the following system, write the equation of motion and calculate the response assuming a) that the system is initially at rest, and b) that the system has an initial displacement of 0.005 m. Use  = 2000 N/m,  = 100 kg,  = 10sin(10t) N.
	
				The equation of motion is
	
	or in standard form:
		
	Note that the forcing function is in terms of sin, not cos as before, so we will have to resolve for the constants  and . Again, setting the particular solution to  and solving for  as before yields:
		
	Now we can solve for  and  by setting the initial conditions  and  to . First, setting  in the equation for  yields:
		
	Then, a function for the velocity of the system is obtained: 
		
	This allows us to obtains:
		
	at . These lead to the full equation for the general solution:
		
	Also, knowing:
		
	and
		
	a) using the initial conditions  = 0 m and  = 0 m/s and the general expression obtained above:
		
	b) using the initial conditions  = 0.005 m and  = 0 m/s and the general expression obtained above:
		
	
				
