 
 

	
	
	Lecture Notes, Class-7
	
		
	
Review from previous class
	
	Harmonic excitations of undamped systems
	Harmonic resonance
		
	
Objectives for today's class
	
	Harmonic excitations of underdamped systems
		
	
Lecture
	
	
Harmonic excitations of damped systems

	Consider the system
	
				
	Again, for simplicity let us consider a harmonic excitation for  such that:
		
	Summing the forces in the above figure in the  direction yields:
		
	For convinces we can convert this to the standard form:	
		
	again, where:
		
	Recall that one way to solve such an equation is to obtain the sum of the homogeneous and particular solutions. 
		
	However, now that we have damping force to consider, out partial solution will have to consider this damping. Therefore:
	
	where  represents the phase shift. Again, the phase shift is expected because of the effect of the damping force. Now, our total equation is:
		
	We can use the method of undetermined coefficients to obtain  and  for the partial solution. First, considering that we write the partial solution in equivalent form:
		 
	Taking the derivative of the assumed forms of the partial solution yields:
		 
		
	Substituting the solutions for . , and  into the EOM in standard form   and rearranging in terms of sin() and cos() yields: 
		
	considering the two special moments in time  and  where cos() and sin() equal zero, respectively. Considering these moments in time and building a matrix yields:
		
		
	We can solve two equations for two unknowns. This results in:
		
		
	From out trigonometric relationships, 
		
		
	We can now derive values for our partial solution 
		
		
	Now we can build a solution for the partial equation (), therefore, the total solution becomes:
	
		
	Note for larger values of , the homogeneous solution approaches zero resulting in the partial solution becoming the total solution. Therefore, the partial solution is sometimes called the steady state response and the homogeneous solution is called the transient response. Solving for the constants  and  using boundary conditions results a total solution expressed as:
		 
		
	Finally, assembling all the terms:
	
		 
		
		
		
	Let's consider how these equation play out in a real system. Again, consider the system
	
				
	If we plot the total, transient, and steady state responses for  N/m,  kg,   kg/s,  N,  rad/sec, and no initial conditions we get:
	
				
	If we increase the forcing function  to 3 N we get:
	
				
	now, using  N, but setting  rad/sec we get:
	
				
	This is because  is closer to the natural frequency . Setting  we get
	
				
	As expected, setting  causes the system to enter into resonance. However, this is different than resonance for a undamped system in that the amplitude of the displacement in not unbounded (recall that the damper will absorb energy). So if we scale the plot correctly we get: 
	
				
	From the figure we can see the the transient response dies out while only the steady state response controls the displacement of the total response. This is always true if the system has any significant damping. Therefore, it is ofter prudent to ignore the transient part and focus only on the steady-state response. Considering the equation for the partial solution: 
		 
	and knowing the values for  and : 
		
		
	We want to find a way to plot the responses of the system only in terms of terms of the systems natural and driving frequencies, and its damping. First, we define a frequency ratio as the dimensionless quantity 
	
	Another common way to express  is . Next, Recall that:
		
	If we factor out  from the denominator and substitute in  and , we get:
		
	this becomes:
		
	in a similar fashion, if we manipulate the equation for  we can get  in term of :
		
	If we solve for a few key values of  we can get the following data points. On the board, we can solve for a few different frequency responses for a few different damping coefficients. 
	
		
		If we plot the values of the normalize amplitude vs  we obtain:
	
				
	And again, if we plot the values of the phase vs  () we obtain:
	
				
	note that the dashed black line is there because the phase value after  need to be adjusted to obtain a continuous plot. An astute observer would notice that the maximum amplitude is not at . While resonance is defined as , this does not define the point of maximum displacement of the steady state response. Let us solve for the frequency ratio with the maximum displacement. This will happen when
		
	We can show that:
		
	when 
		
	however, this is only true for under damped system in which . If  than the value in imaginary and the peak value is at . In these cases, the maximum displacement is a function of only .
	
	
Example 1
	Consider the simple spring mass system, 
	
				
	where  rad/sec and  = 0.0085. Calculate the displacements of the steady-state response for =132 and 125 rad/sec. In both cases, use  = 10 N/kg. 
	
	From before, we know the solution for the displacement of the partial solution for =132 rad/sec is:
		
	while for =125 rad/sec X is:
		
	Therefore, a slight change in the driving frequency (about 5) results in a 85 change in the amplitude of the steady-state response. 
	
	
