 
 

	
	
	Lecture Notes, Class-8
	
		
	
Review from previous class
	
	Harmonic excitations of underdamped systems
	Frequency response
		
	
Objectives for today's class
	
	Base excitations
		
	
Lecture
	
	
Base excitation

Often, loading is not applied directly to the mass, but rather the mass of the system is excited when the base of mount that it is attached to is excited. This is called base excitation, or sometimes support motion. Examples of base excitation, or where base excitation is considered, include:


machines on rubber mounts
automobiles excited by the road
building under earthquake loading
hospital equipment
Consider the following system base excited system

		where  is the displacement of the mass and  is the displacement of the base. Note that we consider positive upward here. The EOM can be constructed the same as before, but non considering that the displacement of the springs and damper is .  In the equilibrium state, where a positive  is up and the base displaces down:
	
Note that these are both negative because the base displacing down "pulls" the mass down with a force  (i.e. if you hold the mass and let the base "fall"). Conversely, the equation for the displaced state is:
	
Apply Newton's second law about the mass () of motion to the sum of forces for the displaced position we get:
	
applying the equation , and rearrange into the EOM yields:	

Now as before we assume a solution for the base excitation, for simplicity we assume


where  is the amplitude and  is the frequency of the base excitation. Adding these terms into our EOM yields:

We can get this in standard form if we divide by  and apply the equations for the critical damping ratio and natural frequency::

This equation can be related to a spring-mass-damper system with two harmonic inputs, one cos and one sin as shown below:

where C and D are arbitrary coefficients. To solve this equation we will use the linearity of the system and solve for a solution that is the sum of two particular solutions, each driven by one of the driving forces. For simplicity, let us just consider the steady-state solution. Recall that the steady state solution for a harmonically excited spring-mass-damper, in terms of a base excitation this cam be expressed as two partial solutions:


Note that both solutions use  as the damping term as the phase angel is independent from the excitation amplitude and the sin and cos terms account for the difference in phase. Now, for , if we allow  to equal  form the equation for  results in the equation:

where 
	
Nest, the partial solution associated with  can be obtained using the method of undetermined coefficients. This results in 

now ass both equation have the same argument , these can be added as:

to obtain:

and:

where  is added to account for the cos and sin terms being combined. As before, if we want to investigate how a frequency input will affect the response (frequency response) we can substitute substitute 
 
into the temporal response to obtain:
 
Next, if we divide by  we can obtain a normalized expression for the displacement:
 
Plotting this for several critical damping ratios:

		Around resonance, the maximum amount of displacement is transmitted to the mass. Additionally,  the above plot shows that at  the displacement transmissibility  is 1. Note the "flip" where overdamped systems have a greater response to excitations after  than do underdamped systems.

For some systems, such as those with weak connections, the force transmitted to the mass is more important that the displacement of the mass. The force transmitted to the mass are the sums of the forces applied by the spring and damper. From the FBD above,

where this force is counteracted by the inertial force of the mass:

Only considering the steady state we found that 
 
if we differentiate this twice, to obtain  and combine this with  we get:
 
Again applying 
 
this becomes:
 
where  is the magnitude of the transmitted force and is 

Again, this can be converted to a force transmissibility to provide a normalized response such that:

Plotting this for several critical damping ratios:

		Again, note the key location . However, also note that the normalized force does not necessarily fall off for  values greater than .  

	
Example 1

	For a given system 1-DOF excited at the base should the system be excited above or below the natural frequency if the transmitted force is the design limitation. Consider the under damped with , and the over damped with  conditions. 

	Solution
	
	We can plot the transmissibility of both the force and displacement onto one plot. For 
	
				it is clear that to minimize the force, the system should be driven with a frequency below natural frequency. Next for  
	
				
	it can be seen that the same rational applies. 
	
	
Example 2
	
	A very common example of base motion is the SDOF model of a vehicle wheel driving over a "rough" road as shown below. 
	
				
	where  = 400,000 N,  = 1007 kg, and  = 20,000 kg/s. What is the defection experience by the car at  = 20 km/h?
	
	Solution

	The road is applying a base excitation that can be approximated as 
	 	
	 	
	 	
	Therefore, the sinusoidal for the base excitation is then:
	 	
	Next, we can calculate the natural frequency:
	 	
	Therefore:
	 	
	and:
		
	Then it can be found that the maximum deflection of the car is:
	into the temporal response to obtain:
	 	
	
	
	
Example 3
	
	A single story building is subjected to a harmonic ground motion, . a) Find the steady-state solution for the structure.  b) If a damper was added between the base and the floor, and , what would be the ideal critical damping coefficient to insure the safety of the building. (Think of safety as limiting displacement and transmitted force.) 
	
				
	
	Solution a)
	
	For simplicity, we can rearrange the system as what follows:
	
				

	solving for the EOM yields:
	 	
	Notice that this is the same as the EOM for a damped 1-DOF system if .	
	
	Therefore, we can use the solution:
	
	where:
		
	
	Now we have, or can easily get, values for , , and . However, we do not have an expression for . We can extract the displacement (and therefore the ) from the acceleration as:
	 	
	 	
	 	
	Resulting in 
	 	
	
	Solution b)
	From the plots we solved for before, we can see that we want a critical damping coefficient that is as low as possible. This means any damping added to the system will decrease its safety. This may seem counter-intuitive, but this is because we are attempting to drive the structure at a frequency higher than its natural frequency, something that does not commonalty happen. Typically excitations for a structure are well below its natural frequency.  	
	
	
	
