 
 

	
	
	Lecture Notes, Class-5
	
		
	
Review from previous class
	
	Introduced the concept fo damping
	Modeled viscous damping in a 1 DOF system
		
	
Objectives for today's class
	
	Introduce material stiffness and systems of springs. 
	Methods for measuring vibrating systems.
		
	
Lecture
	
	
Stiffness
	The stiffness, k, of a body is a measure of the resistance offered by an elastic body to deformation. For a single degree of freedom (DOF), the stiffness is defined as
	
	The stiffness of the spring that we have been considering can be more closely related to materials properties. Considering the following bar and mass:
	
				
	From Hooke's law, we know that the force acting on a material can be expressed as 
	
	 where  is the elastic modulus and  is the cross-sectional area of the beam. Now, let the deformation in the rod be defined as:
		
	Next,  can also be expressed as 
		
	 we can combine this k= to get:
		
	In a similar fashion, we can also solve the equivalent system for a mass at the end of a cantilever beam.
	
				
	From engineering mechanics we know that the deflection at the point of a beam  of a beam with a point load  is:
		
	replacing the point load with a mass  and knowing that stiffness is  we can show that  
		

	
Equivalent stiffness	
	
	For systems with more then one spring acting on a body, equivalent stiffness can be calculated as

	
				
	These are derived considering the displacement  of the systems. For two springs in series:
	
				
	The total displacement is 
	
	Using the equation for stiffness , this converts to:
	
	As  is the same throughout the system, we can cancel out . Solving for the equivalent stiffness yields:
	
	Similarly for a system of springs in parallel:
	
				
	The displacement in both springs is the same, so the total displacement is 
	
	The forces in the direction of spring elongation sum to zero, therefore:
		
	Substituting the displacement and stiffness into the force equation yields:
		
	this simplifies to:
	

	
Obtaining the damping coefficient of a system using the logarithmic decrement method
	
	For a vibrating system, the  mass () and stiffness () can be measured using scales and static deflection tests. However, the damping coefficient () is a more difficult quantity to determine. From  and  we can compute the natural frequency () and the critical damping coefficient (). Therefore, knowing that the critical damping ratio () is defined as:
		
	if we calculate , we can obtain  for the system of interest. This is made possible because  can be calculated from  and . Observing the temporal response for the underdamped system, 
	
				we mark three points of maximum amplitude, , , and  that happen at , , and , respectively. Considering displacement values for the first two points  and . separated by a complete period ().  Knowing that one cycle is , the time period for this complete cycle is given by:
		
	where  is the damped natural frequency. This is the time period () of damped oscillations. If derive an equation for the values of the peaks, also called the envelope of maximum values, we get: 
	 	
	Knowing that the system is underdamped,  can be solved for using the initial conditions  and , therefore: 
	 	
	In terms of  and , we can express the displacement at these times as:
		
	and 
		
	therefore:
		
	However, from before we know that . Therefore, we can express this last equation as:
		
	Next, we take the natural log of both sides to get the logarithmic decrement, denoted by :
		
	This shows us that the ratio of any two successive amplitudes for an underdamped system, vibrating freely, is constant and is a function of the damping only. Sometimes, in experiments, it is more convenient/accurate to measure the amplitudes after say "" peaks rather than two successive peaks (because if the damping is very small, the difference between the successive
	peaks may not be significant). The logarithmic decrement can then be given by the equation
		
	Once we use the experimental data to obtain , and knowing that:
		
	we can calculate the value of :
	
	Therefore, having  we can solve for the coefficient of damping, , as: 
		
	
	
Example 1
	Calculate the damping coefficient of the problem expressed above given that  = 3 kg and  = 20 N/m,  = 11 mm, and  = 2 mm.
	
	First, we solve for , for  = 2:  
		
	Next, we can calculate , as: 
	
	And lastly:	
		
	
	
Example 2 
	The free response of a 1000-kg automobile with stiffness of  = 400,000 N/m is observed to be underdamped. Modeling the automobile as a single-degree-of-freedom oscillation in the vertical direction, determine the damping coefficient if the displacement at  is measured to be 2 cm and 0.22 cm at .
	
	Knowing  = 2 cm and  = 0.22 cm and , therefore:
		
	and:
	
	therefore, we can obtain the damping coefficient as
		
	
	
Example 3
	Calculate the undamped frequency of the following system:
	
				
	The springs are combined as shown, using the equations defined before.  Now, considering that the displacement () of the top spring, and the bottom spring are the same we can state the total stiffness , is the summation of the two. Therefore,    
	
				




	rearranging to get a common denominator:
		
	For and arbitrary mass, , the undamped frequency  can be calculated as:
		

	 
	
	
