 
 

	
	
	
	Lecture Notes, Class-1
	
		
	
Objectives for today's class
	
	Go over the syllabus.  
	Define a 1 Degree of freedom (1-DOF) system.
	Recognize a 1-DOF system.
	Build the equation of motion (EOM) for a (1-DOF) system without damping.
		
	
Lecture
	
	
What are vibrations?
	Vibrations:
	
	is the study of repetitive motion of objects to a stationary reference or normal position. 
	are everywhere and effect the design of mechanical systems. 
	need to be considered in design for fatigue, safety, and comfort considerations.
		In this class we will focus on 1-DOF systems. 

	
Define "simple harmonic motion"
	Simple harmonic motion is a type of periodic motion where the restoring force is directly proportional to the displacement and acts in the direction opposite to that of displacement.
	
	
What is a 1-DOF system?
	
	When 1 variable can describe the motion of a structure or system of bodies, than the system is a 1-DOF system. Examples of variables offten used are ,  ,  , and  . We will often drop the "" for simplicity in this class. 
	
	Examples of 1-DOF systems include:
	
	door
	yo-yo
	mass and spring
		
	
Review
	
	Newton's three laws of motion
	
	In an inertial frame of reference, an object either remains at rest or continues to move at a constant velocity, unless acted upon by a force.
	In an inertial reference frame, the vector sum of the forces  on an object is equal to the mass m of that object multiplied by the acceleration a of the object: . (It is assumed here that the mass m is constant)
	When one body exerts a force on a second body, the second body simultaneously exerts a force equal in magnitude and opposite in direction on the first body.
		In this class we consider only ideal springs, these springs are:
	
	linear 
	massless
	typically  is assumed down
		
				
	
	
Equation of motion	
	
	A EOM is an equation that allows us to model a vibrating system about its equilibrium point and relates the transfer of energy from the spring to the kinetic energy. We can solve an EOM in three steps.
	
	Draw a free body diagram (FBD) at the system's equilibrium and displaced position (without a displacing force).
	Apply Newtons second law.
	Write the EOM in standard form.
		Considering the system:
	
				
	Step-1
	Define the direction of displacement, and draw the FBD for the equilibrium and displaced state.  
	
		

	equilibrium state  displaced state
		
	The equation for the equilibrium state is:
	
	and in the displaced state:
		
	This equation does not equal zero as the FBD does not account for the restoring force. 
	
	Step-2 Apply Newton's second law (we want to store energy in the kinetic state) of motion to the sum of forces for the displaced position we get: 	 	
		
		
	Step-3 Rearrange in the standard form to construct an EOM: 	
		
	
	
Equation of motion for systems with initial displacement	
	Some systems will have an initial displacement, as the system will oscillate around this position we need to define the EOM about this position. Considering the system:
	
				
	Step-1
	Define the direction of displacement, and draw the FBD for the equilibrium and displaced state.  
	
		

	equilibrium state  displaced state
		
	The equation for the equilibrium state is:
	
	and in the displaced state:
		
	This equation does not equal zero as the FBD does not account for the restoring force.	
	Step-2 Apply Newton's second law (we want to store energy in the kinetic state) of motion to the sum of forces for the displaced position we get: 	
	
	We can than use the information from the equilibrium state to cancel out some terms, this becomes:
		
	Step-3 Rearrange in the standard form to construct an EOM: 	
		
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	



