 
 

	
	
	
	Lecture Notes, Class-3
	
		
	
Review from previous class
	
	Solved the ODE (EOM) though observing a vibrating system
	Obtain an equation for the free response of a system
		
	
Objectives for today's class
	
	Review Euler's (pronounced oy-ler) formula
	Obtain a general solution for vibrating systems
		
	
Lecture

	
Review of complex numbers.
	Vibration analysis uses complex numbers to solve the EOM's differential equation. In this class the imaginary number is termed  (sometime referred to as ): such that:
	
		
	and:	 
		
	a general complex number.  can be expressed as 
		 	
	here,  is referred to as the real number and  is the imaginary part of the number . Such complex numbers can be represented in the complex plane, also called a Argand plot. The absolute value or modules is defined as  presented on the Argand plot. 
	
	
				
	 and  prime are complex conjugate pairs. In mathematics, the complex conjugate of a complex number is the number with an equal real part and an imaginary part equal in magnitude but opposite in sign. In other words, a conjugate pair is  and .  
	
	Definition  con·ju·gate (adjective): Coupled, connected, or related.
	
	
Review of Euler's formula.
	
	Euler's formula, named after Swiss engineer and mathematician Leonhard Euler (1707-1783), is a mathematical formula in complex analysis that establishes the fundamental relationship between the trigonometric functions and the complex exponential function. Euler's formula states that for any real number ,
		
	where . This equation can also be expressed as:
		
	This can be expressed in terms of polar coordinates as:	
	
				
	
Theory of elementary differential equations. 
	We can also solve the following EOM:
		
	in a more analytical manner using the theory of elementary differential equations. To do this we have to assume a solution, in the form of 
	
	here,  and  are non zeros constants that need to be determined.  Using successive differentiation, we get:
	
	and 
	
	therefore,  becomes:
	
	Now we divide by  to obtain the characteristic equation:
	
	We can do this because  is never zero, therefore, we never divide by zero. The quadratic formula gives us:
	 
	remember that . Notice that the  tells us there are two solutions to this problem. So, putting  back into our assumed solution, we get two solutions:   
	
	and 
	
	As we deal with linear systems, we know that the sum of the solutions is also a solution, resulting in:
	
	where  and  are complex valued constants of integration. This equation derived using Euler's formula is equivalent to the . To recover the previously assumed solution we apply the knowledge that  and  are complex congregate pairs and as such the magnitude can be expressed as . Using Euler's polar notation,  and  can be expressed as 
		
	where  and  are real numbers, the equation becomes:	
		
	this becomes:
		
	Remembering Euler's equations from before, this becomes:
		
	combining the "cos" terms and canceling out the "sin" terms this becomes:
		
	This is equivalent to  if we take  and knowing sin() = cos().
	
	
Formulate the general solution from Euler's expression. 	
	From Euler's equation we saw that:
		
	we can expand this into the form: 
	
	using trigonometric functions. This equates to:
		
	as  is always real, we can define:
		
	and
		
	lastly, as the general solution is written as:
		
	This is the general solution for the EOM () of the considered oscillating system where  and  are defined as:
	
	and	
		
	These are obtained from a trigonometric relationship, similar to that used before:
	
				again,  and  are:
	
		

	
One Equation in three forms:
	Form one, for  subject to nonzero initial conditions can be written as:  	
		
	where  and  are complex terms. Form 2 is:
	
	while form three is:
		
	where , , , and , are all real valued constants. Each set of constants can be related to each other by:
	
	A = A_1^2+ A_2^2 &  = tan^-1(A_1A_2) 

	A_1 = (a_1+a_2) &  A_2 = (a_1-a_2)j 

	a_1 = A_1-A_2j2 &  a_2 = A_1+A_2j2
		Which follow from trigonometric identities and the Euler's formulas. 
	
	
Example 1	Using the general solution: 
		
	Calculate the values of  and  in terms of their initial conditions  and .
	
	Solution: Knowing the following for  and :
		
		
	Now apply the initial conditions,  and , this yields:
		
	
	Solving for  and  shows us:
	
	thus:
		



	
Important items from today
	
	
	The solution for a vibrating system can be expressed in various forms
	These forms relate to each other through Euler's equations
	