 
 


	
	
	
	Lecture Notes, Class-4
	
		
	
Review from previous class
	
	Solve the ODE
	Obtain an equation for the free response of a system
		
	
Objectives for today's class
	
	Introduce the concept fo damping
	Model viscous damping in a 1 DOF system
		
	
Lecture
	
	
What is damping?
	
	The response of a spring-mass system predicts that a system will oscillate indefinitely. However, we know that this is not true from observing real-world solutions. So based on real-world observations and mathematical conveniences, we need to add a term that will remove "energy" from the system with time. To do this we introduce the ideal dashpot, modeled with the terms .
	
	
				
	A spring forms a physical model of the cause vibration, through its storage and release of energy, a damper forms a physical model for dissipating energy We typically model dampers as viscous dampers, and as such the force is proportional to the velocity of the damper. The damping force  has the form 
	
	
	the constant c, called the damping coefficient, has the units of kg/s.
	
	
What does it mean in real life?
	
	Systems have damping, but not with just physical dampers. Our spring-mass systems are just representations of real-world systems.
	
	
	
				
What does damping look like in terms of displacement vs time

	
				
	The key types of damping are:
	
	Undamped - Oscillates around the equilibrium and does not decay.
	Under damped - Oscillates around the equilibrium and slowly decays  and is the most common case.
	Critically damped - provides the quickest approach to zero amplitude for a damped oscillator.
	Overdamped - Does not pass the equilibrium position and is a simple a decay with no oscillation.
		In this class we are only considering positive damping, mass, and stiffness values.
	
	
Solve the EOM with damping?
	
	Using the FBD for the system, we can conclude that the EOM for this system:
	
				
	is:
	
	Rearranging into standard form and concerting forces into parameters  and  results in:
	
	This system is subject to the same initial conditions as before,  and . Again, we chose to model it this way for convinces, so let's solve it in a similar manner to the EOM without damping. Again, assume the solution:
	
	here,  and  are non zeros constants that need to be determined.  Using successive differentiation, we get:
	
	and 
	
	therefore,  becomes:
	
	Now we divide by  to obtain the characteristic equation:
	
	We can do this because  is never zero, therefore, we never divide by zero. The quadratic formula gives us:
	
	Some key points from this equation:
	
	The  tells us there are two solutions to this problem
	if , system is Underdamped, solutions are complex conjugate pairs 
	if , system is critically damped, solutions are equal negative real numbers 
	if , system is Overdamped, solutions are distinct negative real numbers 
		From this, we can see that  is a special value, lets define a value for  that will give us this critical damping number. We will call it the critical damping coefficient (). So setting the equation as:
	
	giving us: 
		
	next we can derive the function:
		
	remember that  for an undamped system. Next, we generate a non-dimensional number (), pounced 'zeta' that will allow us to distinguish between different types of damping.  is called the critical damping ratio.
		
	Now if we put the  back into the characteristic equation and resolve using the quadratic equation we get: 
	
	From this equation it become clear that  determines whether the roots are complex or real, this in turn determines the nature of the response of the structure. Listing our possible responses we get:
	[h!]
		
		For each damping case, we will have a different solution to the problem. 
	
	
Under damped motion
	
 	In the case that , a complex conjugate pair of roots are the solutions to the characteristic equation after pulling out a :
	 	
	and:
	 
	Where the  is pulled out because:
	 	
	Next, let us "arbitrarily" define:
	 	
	where  is the damped natural frequency. Therefore, the equations become:
	 	
	and:
	 	
	Again, we have two solutions to a linear problem, so we can combine these into one solution and insert  into the assumed solution  to obtain:
	 	
	where  and  are complex valued constants. This can now be simplified into:	
	 
	Using Euler's equations, (same as before) and choosing:
	 	
	and
	 	
	The general form of this solution is then:
	 	
	Recall that for undamped 1-DOF systems we showed 
	 	
	As  accounts for the damping, our current solution becomes:
	 	
	Now that we have  and , we can solve for the boundary conditions  and  by setting , we get:
	 	
	and taking the directive of  using the product rule (fg)'= f'g+fg', we get:
	 
	 
	letting  gives us the equation:
	 	
	This simplifies to:
	 	
	solving for :
	 	
	and as the : 
	 	
	Using the trigonometric relationship:
	
				we get: 
	 	
	and applying  we get:
	 	
	Finally, collecting all of our important equations:
	
	Critical damping coefficient: 
	Damping ratio: 
	Damped natural frequency: 
	Solution for underdamped system: , where: *
	A = (v_0+_nx_0)^2 + (x_0_d)^2_d &  = tan^-1(x_0_dv_0+_nx_0) 
			
Over damped motion
	
	In the case of overdamped systems, , the solutions for  are distinct real roots that are written as:
	 	
	and:
	 
	The solution for the EOM using the assumed solution then becomes:
	
	This equation represents a non-oscillating response of the system. Again,  and  are solved for using known boundary conditions  and  such that:
	
	a_1 &= -v_0+(-+^2-1)_n x_02_n^2-1 
 
	a_2 &= v_0+(+^2-1)_n x_02_n^2-1
		
	Typical responses for a overdamped system with various initial conditions are shown below:
	
				
	
Critically damped motion
	
	In the case of critically damped systems, , the solutions for  will be equal negative real numbers, therefore from before:
	
	We get:
	 	
	Because both solutions ( and ) are the same, we multiply the second solution by  so the solution for a critically damped system is in the same form as before. The solution for the EOM using the assumed solution then becomes:
	 
	This simplifies into:	
	
	This equation represents a non-oscillating response of the system. Again,  and  are solved for using known boundary conditions  and  such that:
	
	a_1 &= x_0 
 
	a_2 &= v_0+_nx_0
		
	Typical responses for a overdamped system with various initial conditions are shown below:
	
				
Standard Form of the EOM
	Typically, we write the EOM:
	
	In what is known as standard form. First, every term is divided by  such that:
		
	This can be rearranged to the standard form:
		
	
Important items from today
	
	
	There are three types of damping cases, under, critical, and over. 
	The under damped system is the only one that oscillates, and as such is of the most importance to this class. 
		[h!]
		
		
	
Example 1	Consider the following 1-DOF system, where  N/m,  kg/s, and  kg, calculate the damped frequency in rad/s and Hz. What damping case is this system?  	
	
				

	
Example 1 Calculate the undamped frequency:
		
	The systems critical damping value:
		
	And the critical damping ratio:
		
	This can also be expressed as 60 damped, this is a underdamped system, and the system will oscillate. Now we can calculate the damped frequency:
		
	Therefore, the system oscillates at 105.6 rad/sec or 16.81 Hz

	
Example 2 
	For a damped one DOF system where , , and  are known to be  = 1 kg,  = 2 kg/s, and  = 10 N/m. Calculate the value of  and . Is the system overdamped, underdamped, or critically damped?	
	
	The natural frequency is calculated as
	
	The damping can be calculated as:
	
	So the damped natural frequency is equal to:
		
	As  the system is underdamped. 	

	
Example 3 
	For the following industrial device consisting of a mass isolated from its fixtures by rubber dampers provide an estimate of the systems oscillating frequency.	
	
				As we only want an estimate of the frequency, we can assume the displacement is small and as such  of the displaced mass is equal  of the resting mass. This leads to the FBD for the resting and displaced masses.
	
			





	Applying newtons second law and combining these equations yields:
		
	As we assumed the displacement is small and  remains unchanged, the assumption that cos() =  is equivalent to cos() =  is logical (draw out the triangles if needed), therefor the prior equation becomes: 
		
	as  and  are small. Therefore, the frequency can be estimated as:	
	
	once the values for the system are known or measured. 	
	
	 




























































































































































































